# CM3267 Lab Instruction for Spectrometer
Ridhuan Syafiq

## Spectrometer setup

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### A. Enabling I2C and SPI using the terminal

1.  Run the following in the terminal.

    ``` bash
    cd ~
    sudo raspi-config
    ```

2.  Under Interfacing Options, set SPI and I2C to **Enabled**.

3.  Reboot from Menu \> Shutdown \> Reboot, or type `sudo reboot`.

4.  `sudo i2cdetect -y 1`

    Executing the above command should show you a table showing the I2C
    addresses in use.

### B. Turn on the virtual environment

> [!WARNING]
>
> Make sure the steps in [RPi Setup](../README.md) were followed before
> proceeding. Verify by checking that `~/RPi-project/spectrometer/venv`
> exists.

1.  Run the following in the terminal.

    ``` bash
    cd ~/RPi-project/spectrometer
    source venv/bin/activate
    ```

2.  Test if the packages were installed correctly. Do this by running
    blinkatest.py

    ``` bash
    python3 blinkatest.py
    ```

3.  Leave your RPi on while we set up the circuit.

### C. Assemble the electronics as in CM3267_B02.pdf

### D. Run the python scripts

1.  To run the scripts, append python3 before the name of the scripts.
    Make sure that the current directory is `~/RPi-project/spectrometer`
    and the venv is active. Example:

    ``` bash
    (venv) pi@raspberrypi:~/RPi-project/spectrometer $ python3 voltage_read.py
    ```

2.  Next, cover the window on the OPT101 photodiode, and retake the
    voltage.

3.  Next, shine your phone torchlight on the OPT101 photodiode, and
    retake the voltage.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Spectrometer script

The script is titled `spectrometer.py`.

### A. Testing your spectrometer

1.  Run the script as above, again ensuring you are in the correct
    folder, and the venv is active. Example:

    ``` bash
    (venv) pi@raspberrypi:~/RPi-project/spectrometer $ python3 spectrometer.py
    ```

2.  Enter `test` for a voltage reading generated by the photodiode under
    the current conditions. This voltage should be very low (below 0.1
    V)if the conditions are dark (detector is well covered from stray
    light and LED switch is off).

3.  `test` again for when LED switch is on. The generated voltage should
    be higher now.

### B. Calibration

1.  Run spectrometer.py. Select the “concentration” option when
    prompted.

2.  Get the absorbance readings of a few blanks to get LOD and LOQ.

3.  Prepare several methylene blue solutions in the range of 0 to 80 μM.

4.  Run the script again to get the absorbance readings and plot to get
    LOL.

### C. Absorption Spectrum

1.  Run spectrometer.py. Select the “angle” option when prompted.

2.  For each angle, take a blank read and a sample read.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

> [!WARNING]
>
> Always run `deactivate` in the terminal once you’re done with the
> scripts, to make sure the venv is deactivated.
